[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> REECE JONES: Hello, I'm Reece
Jones, and welcome to Module 7,
What to Expect.
In this module, I'll describe
what a typical lucid dream
looks and feels like.
And how with this knowledge,
you can prepare yourself
for the inevitable
rush of excitement
you'll feel upon first
gaining lucidity.
How to modulate your
emotions from there.
And ultimately, how to
stabilize and extend
the length of your lucid dream.
All sorts of things can happen
upon first gaining lucidity.
The spectrum ranges from
a full-scale explosion
of awareness, followed by
total control of the dream
environment, all the way
to instantly waking up
and the lucid dream ending.
This is a big spectrum and
many nuanced experiences
lie in between both extremes.
First, let's look at the
waking up end of the spectrum.
Why does this happen,
and how do you stop it?
Well, rest assured if
you experience this,
you're not alone.
This is a common occurrence
with newer lucid dreamers,
and usually happens
because of essentially
unfettered excitement.
The realization
that you're dreaming
is just so mind-blowing,
so earth shattering,
that you blow open the
doors between waking
life and dreaming life and
re-emerge into your bed
at home.
While this can be extremely
frustrating the first few times
you experience it,
don't be disheartened.
There's an important lesson
to be learned here effectively
modulating your emotions.
Just like in waking
life, learning
to modulate your emotions is
a very useful tool to have.
And you can do it
just like this.
Take a deep breath in and out.
Now, get walking and
continue breathing deep.
Feel the dream environment as
you walk around it, the walls,
your hands, any furniture.
Appreciate what you're
experiencing and feel
gratitude for it, but
don't let your thoughts
get away from you.
Stay centered and
continue breathing deep.
Say out loud to yourself,
I'm lucid dreaming
and I'm prepared.
Now, notice how your
heart rate is lowering
and your mind is focusing.
Similar to a meditation,
allow yourself to really soak
in all the sensory stimuli here
engaging calmly, but directly
with the dream.
Doing all of this will
sharpen the visuals
and help you stay lucid
for prolonged periods.
You can even practice
this in waking life.
At interim moments
throughout your waking day,
perform a reality check.
And as you do, regardless
of the confirmation
that you are indeed
in waking life,
role play what it would feel
like to receive a dreaming life
confirmation instead.
In other words, pretend you're
dreaming, take it all in,
feel the all, soak
in the science,
practice the grounding protocol.
Go through the whole
thing just like a drill.
And the more you do this,
the more used to the idea
of lucidity you'll become.
It's also important to underline
how critical movement is
within a lucid dream.
Without it, things typically
break down quickly.
So with that in mind, try
not to linger in any one spot
for too long.
If you want to stay exploring
one specific room, that's fine,
you can do that, but keep
moving around it as you do.
If you want to inspect one
specific object for a prolonged
period, that's fine too but
keep your eyes moving over it
as you do.
For me, the dream
begins to break down
if I don't offer it some sort
of input for more than about
five seconds.
So keep that general
rule in mind.
For the ride to
keep going, you need
to continue rolling
along its tracks.
If the call stops, you'll
often find yourself ejected
from the ride prematurely.
OK.
But you might wonder,
when I get lucid,
what will it actually look like?
Well, again, this is
a spectrum ranging
from grainy, unstable,
and colorless, all the way
to vivid, ultra HD, and
more real than real.
Again, this vividness can
be startling to the psyche
and cause you to wake
up if you're unprepared.
So be aware of the potential.
And what do you do
if you find yourself
lucid in an unrealistic-looking
environment?
Perhaps everything's
fuzzy and black and white.
Well, they should naturally
happen less and less
the more experienced you
become, but until then, you
can employ what I call
assertion techniques, which
is exactly what it sounds like.
Be upfront with the dream.
Tell it what you want.
And as you tell it,
believe you have the power
to change the environment
because you do.
In practice, this could be as
simple as saying more color now
or less blurriness now.
It's a simple technique,
but you'll be surprised
how often it works.
So let's move forward now.
So you're lucid, you've
successfully grounded the scene
and you're now 15 minutes
deep into the experience.
Is that it?
Have you locked in
lucidity permanently?
Well, perhaps it's
wise not to assume so.
In fact, lucidity is known to
wane over time, either because
of dream characters trying to
distract you with plot elements
or simply from a
fading awareness.
But don't worry, there
are ways to stop this too.
Firstly, don't be afraid
to ignore a dream character
if you have a plan
in place and they're
trying to waylay you from it.
It's OK to stay focused and
not let them lead you away.
Or if you do decide to go
ahead and follow their lead,
that's fine, but make sure to
intermittently remind yourself
where you are and
what you're doing.
You can do this in a whole
host of different ways,
including follow-up
reality checks
or by simply speaking
out loud to yourself.
Remember I'm dreaming,
don't forget.
Finally, know that
sometimes the dream imagery
will fade without the
lucid dream actually coming
to an end.
That's right.
You can find yourself
in what essentially
amounts to a void area
without actually waking up.
This is an
interesting phenomenon
and can be especially
confusing for beginners
because the vast majority
of your dream senses
are stripped away from you.
And so everything is saying
this is the end of the dream yet
somehow you're still
inside the dream.
When you find yourself
in these areas,
the only sense that
usually remains--
for me at least--
is touch.
So as a way to stay
focused and not
drift back into
non-lucidity, I like
to keep myself active and
aware by feeling my way
around the dark environment.
Even though there's
nothing to see,
there should still
be things to feel.
So don't give up
whilst in this space
because a new dream scene is
likely to emerge momentarily.
Now you have a
little taste of what
to expect upon gaining
lucidity, but remember
the spectrum is huge.
So expect to discover
much more along the way.
[MUSIC PLAYING]